It's uh, AI is, uh,
either people are really excited about it or they're really terrified of it.
Those are the sort, it seems to be the two responses.
Either people have this dismal view of these robots taking over the world,
or they think it's going to be some amazing sort of symbiotic relationship with
that we have with these things. That's gonna evolve human,
human beings past the, the monkey stage that we're at right now.
Yeah. And I, I, I tend to be on the ladder more positive side. Good of,
of this dichotomy. But I,
I think one thing that has struck me in recent years is
many people are now, you know,
mentally confronting all the issues running AI for the first time. And I,
I mean,
I've been working on AI for three decades and I first started thinking
about AI when I was a little kid in the early,
late sixties and early seventies when I saw AI in robots on the original star
Trek.
So I guess I've had a lot of cycles to process of
positives and,
and negatives of it where it's now like suddenly most of the world is thinking
through all this for the first, for the first time. And, you know,
when you first wrap your brain around the idea that there may be creatures
10,000 or a million times smarter than, than human beings at first,
this is a bit of a shocker, right? Yeah. And then know, I mean,
it takes a while to internalize this into your worldview.
Well, it's that, there's also,
I think there's a problem with the term artificial intelligence, cuz it's, it's,
it's intelligent, it's there, it's a real thing. Yeah. Like it's not artificial,
it's not like a fake diamond or a fake Ferrari. It's a real thing. And it.
It's not a great term. Right.
And there's been many attempts to replace it with synthetic
intelligence for, for example. Right. But for better or worse,
like AI is there it's part of the popular imagination.
It seems it's an imperfect word, but it's, it's not going away. Well.
I, I, my question is, is like,
are we married to this idea of intelligence and of life being biological,
being carbon-based tissue and cells and blood and or
insects or mammals or fish, or are we married to that too much?
Do you think that it's entirely possible that what human beings are doing
and what people are at the,
the tip of AI right now that are really pushing the technology?
What they're doing is really creating a new lifefor that it's,
it's going to be a new thing that just the same way we recognize wasps and
buffalos and artificial intelligence is just gonna be a life form that emerges
from the creativity and ingenuity of human Inc. Well.
In, in indeed. So, I mean I've long been, uh, an advocate of a philosophy.
I think of as, as patternism like,
it's the pattern of organization that appears to be the, the,
the critical thing and the min the, you know,
the individual cells and going down further,
like the molecules and particles in our body are, are turning over all the time.
So it's not the specific combination of elementary particles,
which makes me who I am or makes you who you are.
It's a pattern by which they're organized and the patterns by which they change
over time. So, I mean,
if we can create digital systems or quantum computers or femto
computers or whatever it is manifesting the patterns of organization that
constitute intelligence, I mean, then, then there you are, there,
there there's intelligence, right? So that, that's not to say that, you know,
consciousness and ex experience is just about patterns of organization.
There may be more dimensions to it, but when,
when you look at what constitutes intelligence thinking, cognition,
problem solving, you know, it's the pattern of organization, not,
not the specific material as, as, as far as we can tell.
So we can see no reason based on all the science that we know so
far,
that you couldn't make anelligent system out of some other form of matter,
rather than the, the specific types of itemss and molecules that, that,
that make up human beings.
And it seems that we're were well on the way to being able to do so.
When you're studying inte when you're studying intelligence,
you're studying artificial intelligence, do,
did you spend any time studying the patterns that insects seem to
cooperatively behave with, like, uh,
how leaf cutter ants build these elaborate structures underground and, you know,
wasps build these giant colonies. And did you study how.
I did actually, yes. So I, I,
I sort of grew up with the philosophy of complex
systems, which was championed by the, by the Santa Fe Institute in, in,
in the 1980s and the whole concept that there's an interdisciplinary complex
systems, science, which includes, you know, biology, cosmology,
psychology, ciology, there's sort of universal patterns of,
of selforganization and, you know, ANTSS,
and auntt colonies have long been a paradigm case for that. And I, I, I, I,
I used to play with the ant colonies in my backyard when, when I,
when I was a kid and you'd lay down food and certain patterns,
you'd see how their ants are laying down phones, and the colonies are,
are organizing it in a, in a certain way.
And that's an interesting self-izinging complex system
on its own. It's lacking some types of adaptive intelligence that,
that human minds and human societies have, but,
but it has also interesting selfganizing patterns.
This me of the novel SOIs by Stan slle,
which was published in, in, in the sixties,
which was really quite, quite a deep, novel, much deeper than the,
the movie that was made of it. Did you ever read the book? SOIs no. So what.
I'm not familiar with the movie either who who's in.
The movie. Um, well, so there was an amazing,
brilliant movie by tarovski the Russian director from the late sixties.
Then there was a, a movie by Steven Soderberg,
which was sort of glmed up and Americanized and, oh, that.
Was fairly recent, right?
Yeah. 10 years ago. But that, that, that wasn't,
didn't get all the deep points of novel, original novel in essence,
there's this, there's this ocean on coding,
the surface of some alien planet,
which has amazingly complex fractal patterns of organization.
And it's also interactive,
like the patterns of organization on the ocean respond based on, on what you do.
And when people get near ocean,
it causes them to hallucinate things and even causes them to see
simulatra of people from their past, even the,
like the person who they had most harmed or injured in their past appears and
interacts with them.
So clearly this ocean has some type of amazing complexity and
intelligence from the patterns it displays. And from the,
we weird things that reeks in your mind so that the people on earth
try to understand how the ocean is thinking.
They send a scientific expedition there to,
to in interact with that ocean. But it's just so alien,
even though it monkeys with people's minds and clearly is doing complex things,
no two way communication is ever is ever established.
And eventually the, the human expedition gives up and goes home.
So it it's a very Russian ending to the novel. Uh, I, I guess it's not,
I think I saw that, but the, the, the interest,
the interesting message there is, I mean, there can be many,
many kinds of intelligence, right? I mean, human intelligence is one thing.
The intelligence of an event colonly is a different thing.
The intelligence of human society is a different thing.
Ecosystem is a different thing, and there could be many,
many types of AI that we could build. We in many,
many different properties, some could be wonderful to human beings.
Some could be horrible to human beings.
Some could just be alien minds that,
that we can't even relate, relate, relate to very, very well.
So we, we have a very limited conception of what an intelligence is.
If we just think by close analogy to, to human minds, and this,
this is important if you're thinking about engineering or growing artificial
light forms or artificial minds, cuz it, it's not just, can we do this?
It's what kind of mind are, are,
are we going to engineer or evolve? Right. And there's a,
there's a huge spectrum of possibility. These, yeah.
That's one of the reasons why I asked you if we had created,
if human beings who had created some sort of an insect and this insect started
organizing and developing these complex colonies,
like a leaf cutter ant and building these structures underground,
people would go crazy. They would panic.
They would think these things are organizing. They're gonna,
they're gonna build up the resources and attack us.
They're gonna try to take over humanity. I mean this, what,
what people are worried about more than anything when it comes to technology,
I think is the idea that we're going to be, uh, irrelevant,
that we're going to be, uh,
antiques and that something new and better is gonna take our place, which is.
It's a weird, which is almost inevit. Yeah.
It's a weird thing to worry about it.
Cuz it's sort of the history of biological life on earth. I mean,
what we know is there's complex things.
They become more comp go single celled organisms to multi- celled organisms.
There seems to be a pattern leading up to us and us with this unprecedented
ability to change our environment. That's what we can do. Right.
We can manipulate things, poison the environment.
We can blow up entire countries with bombs if we'd like to.
And we can also do wild creative things like send signals through space and land
on someone else's phone. On the other side of the world, almost instantaneously,
we have incredible power, but we're also,
we're also so limited by our biology. Yeah.
The thing I think people are afraid of and I I'm afraid of,
but I don't know if it makes any sense, is that the next
level of life, whatever artificial life is or whatever the, the,
the human Symbio is that it's gonna lack emotions,
it's gonna lack desires and needs.
And all the things that we think are special about us, our creativity,
our desire for attention and love all of our comradery,
all these different things that are sort of programmed into us with,
with our genetics in order to advance our species,
that we we're so connected to these things. But they're,
so they're the reason for war. They're the reason for lies, deception,
th Thiry.
There's so many things that are built into being a person that are responsible
for all the WOS of humanity, but we're afraid to.
Lose those. Yeah. I think it, it's almost inevitable by the,
this point that humanity is going to create
synthetic intelligences with tremendously greater general intelligence
and practical capability than human beings have. I mean,
I think I know how to do that with the software I'm working on with my own team,
but if we've fail, you know,
there's a load of other teams who I think are a bit behind us,
but are going in the same direction though. Right? So you guys feel like.
You're at the tip of this PI with.
This stuff. I do, but I also think
that's not the most important thing from a human perspective.
The most important thing is that humanity as a whole is quite close to this,
this threshold event. Right. So how far do you think it's.
Quite close.
By my own gut feeling five to 30 years, let's say that's pretty close,
but if I'm wrong and it's a hundred years, like in the historical time scale,
that sort of doesn't matter. It's like,
did the Sumerians create civilization 10,000 or 10,050 years ago? Like what,
what difference does it make? Right. Right.
So I think we're quite close to creating superhuman
artificial general intelligence.
And that's in a way almost inevitable given where we are
now, on the other hand,
I think we still have some agency regarding whether this comes out
in a way that, you know,
respects human values and culture, which are important to us now,
given who and what we are. Yeah.
Or that is essentially indifferent to human values and,
and culture in the same way that we're mostly indifferent to chimpanzee values
and, and culture at, at, at this point,
I mean completely indifferent to insect values and culture. Not completely. But,
uh, if you think about it, I mean, if I'm building a new house,
I will bulldoze a bunch of events,
but yet we get upset if we extinct an insect species. Right. So we, we care,
we carry to some level, but not, but we,
but we would like the superis to care about us more than we care about insects
or, or grade eights. Sure. AB absolutely. Right. And I think this,
this is something we can impact right now. And to, to, to be honest,
I mean, in a certain part of my mind, I, I, I can think, well, like in,
in the end, I don't matter that much.
My four kids don't matter that much. My granddaughter doesn't matter that much.
Like we are patterns of organization in a very long lineage of
patterns of organization, but they matter very much to you. Yeah. And,
and the other, you know, dinosaurs came and went and the, those came and went,
humans may come and go.
The AI that we create may come and go, and that's the nature of the universe.
But on the other hand, of course, in my heart,
from my situated perspective, as an individual human, like if,
if some AI tried to annihilate my,
my 10 month son, I would try to kill that AI. Right? Sure. Like, so a a as,
as a human being situated in this specific, you know,
species place and time, I care a lot about the condition of,
of all of us humans. And so I,
I would like to not only create a powerful general intelligence, but,
but to create one, which, which is,
is going to be beneficial to humans and,
and other life forms on, on the planet, even while in some ways going,
going beyond EV everything that, that we are. Right.
And there can't be any guarantees about something like this. On the other hand,
you Maddy has really never had any guarantees about anything anyway,
right? I mean, since, since, since, since we created civilization,
we've been leaping into the unknown one time after the other, in,
in a somewhat conscious, and selfware way about it from, you know,
agriculture to language, to math, to the industrial revolution,
we're leaping into the unknown all the time,
which is part of why we are where we are today instead of just another
animal species. Right?
So we can't have a guarantee that
Agis artificial general intelligences,
we create are going to do what we consider the right thing,
given our current value systems. On, on the other hand,
I suspect we can bias the odds in the favor of,
of human values and, and culture and that something I've,
I've put a lot of thought and work into alongside the, you know,
the basic algorithms of, of artificial cognition.